all right good morning everyone the end
is in sight we are going to crack open
the final theme uh of this course
evolving physical structure and neural
control policies for auton autonomous
machines simultaneously evolving bodies
and brains which is what the field of
evolutionary robotics was set up in the
first place to do so it's taken us a
while to get here but we're here before
we talk about evolving uh and brains
let's talk a little bit about final
project uh most of what I've seen from
most of you looks like you're making
good progress people are being good
about managing expectations breaking
ambitious projects down into reasonable
weekly bite-sized chunks revising those
weekly work packages when things don't
quite work out as you expect them to all
looks good uh I saw a couple of you this
week about the mass patch so on the tips
and tricks page there's a bunch of
things you can sort of add to pyro Sim
pyro Sim is among many things a shield
that is meant to shield from you all the
nitty-gritty details of the underlying
physics engine which is pybullet
nitty-gritty details like this has
anybody actually looked at a urdf file
or an SDF file I think I forced you to
do so in assignment one or two uh a
point about the mass
patch Pyro
by default assigns a value of one as a
mass to every link that you create your
robot from so if your robot is made up
of nine links it has a mass of nine just
a reminder that in most physics engines
including Pi bullet there are no actual
units so each uh link weighs one one
what one kilogram one pound doesn't
matter for our
purposes the mass patch uh uh challenges
you to add a little bit of code to pyrro
sim that opens up or exposes this
particular parameter to your own code so
you can change the Mass properties of
your robots some of you are working on
bipeds one way to make it easier for a
biped to walk is to make the feet
heavier some of you are making a
baseball robot uh if your robot weighs
the say has the same mass as the ball
that it hits what happens when the robot
hits the ball with its bat
doesn't go very far doesn't go very or
the robot goes plenty far and the object
doesn't necessarily Go Far So for many
of you altering Mass distribution makes
sense the formatting of these urdf and
SDF files is that numerical parameters
like mass for example needs to be
surrounded in quotation marks why is
that the case I have no idea that's just
the way piy billot works so in the uh in
uh for example Mass urdf dopy the part
of pyro Sim that writes out the U urdf
file or writes out the mass part of the
urdf you'll see that by default this
part of pyro
Sim just writes out this string right so
a default Mass uh of one so we could
alter this to do the
following and then put whatever Mass
value you want in there but now we've
lost the double quotation marks an easy
mistake to make I saw that a couple of
you made it you need to do something
like this fidgeting with formatting it's
a bit of a pain but there you go okay
there's other a couple other places like
that in the patches and the tips to tips
and tricks if things aren't working it's
usually because you've altered pyro Sim
so that it no longer writes out a
compliant urdf and SDF file if you're
getting that kind of error have a look
and if you're still stuck come and see
frya or myself and we'll get you unstuck
okay any other questions about things in
the final
project yes when you're initially
starting simulation is there any way so
like you have two cubes is there any way
to have it start like slightly offet
turn yes okay so how do you set the
initial orientation of uh objects in
your simulation you can so let's see it
should be in here
somewhere yeah here it is okay so again
we're looking directly at a urdf file
and so I am highlighting all of the
information in a urdf file that
describes how a link works so here's
link open link close link everything in
here specifies physical properties of
the link again pyro Sim is hiding most
of these details from you
let's see if you can read The Matrix
directly here which what material inside
this highlighted formatting do you need
to change to change the
initial
orientation of a
link just as a reminder remember that
what the physics engine is doing for you
what py bullet is doing which sits
underneath pyrosim what pybullet is
doing is Computing all of the forces
that are acting on every link and
updating the position and the 3D
position and the 3D orientation of the
object but in some cases you might want
to start with a particular
orientation you can actually alter this
code or have pyro Sim alter how it
writes out this code to set the initial
orientation of a link where is it in
here rpy parameter it is absolutely the
rpy parameter rpy stands
for close you're on the right
track roll pitch and Y roll pitch and Y
that's it you'll see that when you
create a link at the moment the default
is zero roll zero pitch zero yah and I
always forget which is which this is one
of them this is one of them and this is
one of them that's how right so go back
and have a look at the mass patch which
allows you to expose Mass to uh initial
to initial settings do exactly the same
thing but for roll pitch and yaah and if
you figure it out let me know and I'll
add it as a orientation patch to the
subreddit other
questions could you go into more detail
about what you're expecting for the
Milestone Force AB testing okay sure uh
what we're expecting okay what we're
expecting in uh deliverable for is
preliminary evidence of your AB testing
what does that mean so uh FR or I are
going to grade your deliverable for what
are we looking for we're looking for we
understand what your version a and
version B is hopefully we probably
already know what that is from your
previous three deliverables but make
that
clear and then what we would like to see
is a series of screenshots or a video
demonstrating algorithm a and algorithm
B in operation is there something that
we can see that demonstrates the
differences between a and
b what we are not looking for in
deliverable 4 is for you to prove that a
is better than b or B is better than a
that's what you're going to attempt to
do during the exam period demonstrate to
us that one is better than the other or
that there is no difference between a or
b hopefully what doesn't happen for you
in the final project is I don't know I
did one run of a and one run of B and
they're kind of they produce kind of
similar Behavior but a little bit
different I don't know whether a is
better than b or B is better than a or
there's no difference between them yeah
we're hoping that you collect enough
data to present to US during the final
project and I'll we'll talk about that
next week we'll talk about the final
project uh oral presentations next week
but for Milestone 4 can you show us that
you've got a and b up and running and
the idea is between deliverable 4 and
your oral presentation I guess that's
about a week's time you're going to let
this cook away on your laptop or
whatever computational resources you
have and then try and prove to us a is
better than b b is better than a where
there's no difference between a or B for
some of you the it'll be relatively easy
in the fourth and final Milestone to
show us visually that there's a
difference between variant A and B
because for some of you a is the
quadruped and B is the hexapod we can
see it it's pretty straightforward for
others of you it's not going to be so
obvious because maybe you made changes
to the cognitive architecture of the
robot so what's okay what's okay and
deliverable for is show us some
screenshot and some video and you might
also show us your terminal so print out
some statements so that we've got some
data or FR or I can see what the
difference is between A or B it's up to
you to figure out how to show us that
you've got a and b working and that they
whatever the difference is between A and
B you make it visible for us make
sense okay any other questions about
that okay so let's see where are we now
Tuesday next Tuesday week from now I
will go through exactly what's expected
for the oral presentation and the
written report for the final
project okay all right so uh as promised
this has been a long time coming we are
going to talk for the remainder of this
course about expanding an evolutionary
algorithm so that it can simultaneously
tune so that can simultaneously tune the
physical structure and the neural
controller of your robot
several times in this course we brought
up the difference between learning and
evolution generally speaking in nature
and in robotics and machine learning
learning implies changes to a neural
network or changes to the controller of
a robot but of course Evolution doesn't
work that way Evolution doesn't respect
our boundaries Mother Nature
simultaneously and is continuously
tuning and tinkering with all aspects of
the phenotype of organisms the idea the
philosophy behind evolutionary robotics
is that if we want to create autonomous
and safe machines it's not enough to
just come up with an idea for a physical
structure and then train a neural
controller for it and hope for the best
in the long run if we want to create
autonomous and intelligent machines we
need to find ways to autonomously
optimize physical structure
and the behavior of the machine itself
that is a particular stance that may or
may not be true I work in the field of
evolutionary robotics I happen to
believe that's going to be uh how things
are going to go in the long run you
don't necessarily need to believe me
what we're going to do in lectures 22 23
24 and 25 is look at how to do this how
do we expand an evolutionary algorithm
to optimize brain and body
simultaneously okay all right so uh as
you can see here we're going to look at
uh we're going to look at the evolution
in brains and bodies of four different
classes of robots traditional rigid
robots today like the ones you're
familiar with rigid links that are
connected with rotational joints the
robots you're going to see today look
very
familiar uh next time in lecture 23
we're going to look at soft robots where
we no longer assume that we have rigid
links connected by rotational joints
we're going to look at Blobs of soft and
rigid material and we'll discuss Le
discuss in lecture 23 why you might want
to do so why might you want to create or
automatically design soft robots final
week of the course we'll look at uh
evolving the bodies and possibly the
brains of robots that are built from
biological rather than technological
components these are biological robots
or more commonly now known as xenobots
and finally in leure 25 we'll look at
arguably not an evolutionary approach
but a way to try and optimize bodies and
brains of robots without having to uh
fall back on random trial and error can
we remove the randomness in evolutionary
algorithms and uh design bodies and
brains automatically in a more
computationally efficient
manner okay let's start with rigid Ro
robots as we've done several times in
this class we're going to go way back in
time to the early
1990s here we
gool
performas Sim environment swimming speed
is used to determin survival most of the
are results from independent Evolutions
some develop strategies similar to those
in real lives once they evolv multiple
copies of these creatures can be made
and simulated together in the same
environment the next group of creatures
were evolved for their ability to move
on a simulated land environment with
gravity and friction some Simple
Solutions with just two parts were found
some seemed like they could use some
assistance While others were fairly
efficient such as this growing life
Behavior here is an odd cousin of the
previous a mutation caused you to
Tumble some creatures evolve to
incorporate contact sensors in their
Control
Systems here is another inchworm like
creature that tends to go in
circles this was actually a creature
first evolved for its ability to swim in
water then later put on land and evolved
further a successful sidewinding ability
resulted here is one with a Hopping
style the protrusions on its arms seemed
to help prevent it from tiing over this
was the fastest with a successful
Galloping like
stride this group was evolved to their
jumping
ability this group was evolved to their
ability to adaptively follow a red light
stores the resulting creatures are now
being interacted with us moving the
light source around as the creature
behaves this one seems to flail randomly
but somehow still manages to approach
the light Perhaps it is mean to move the
go away just as it arrives here is one
that has the color
like depending on the direction the life
you can adaptively swim up or down very
well this final group of creatures was
evolved to their ability to compete for
control of a green h the closest to the
cube at the end of a simulation is the
winner here a strategy first arose was
simply tumbling towards the
quebe then one learned to block out his
opponent but then later one learned to
overcome the obstacle by climbing over
it some pined down their
opponents some covered the cube with
protective arms
others simply unfolded onto the
cube the success of a strategy is often
highly defendent on the opponent here is
a hockey cling creature which takes the
cube away and wins by a large margin
here are two similar hockey strategies
battling it out with appropriate
gestures this crab life creatur walks
well but often continues fast the que
and instead seems to prefer beating up
on his
opponent against the arm the crab seems
to simply walk
away a successful strategy is this two
arm technique that swipes quickly in
from the side and moves the cube over to
a second
on these are the final rounds of
competition amongst the overall
finally the Seeker arm goes against the
side swi but the cube is just Out Of
Reach we spent a little bit of time last
time talking about parallels between
those agents and human behavior same
thing here right why go after the cube
when you can just beat up on your
adversary okay
observations from those videos before we
dive into the
details what did we just
see was really impressive for 1994 um
but uh robots assembled from rinear
blocks kind of free form join to each
other in varying
environments absolutely right so you can
see clearly the body plans are being
evolved along with the neural
controllers of these robots absolutely
state-of-the-art for
1994 well well ahead of its time other
observations from what you just
saw two parts to the video obviously in
the first part we were looking at
individuals uh individually evolved
robots what did we see in the second
part aside from robots beating up on
each
other competition
where did that competition come
from coolu co-evolution so we'll see
towards the end of today's lecture
another Twist on an evolutionary
algorithm which is instead of evolving
one population of Agents why don't we
evolve two populations of Agents where
the fitness of any one individual in
this population is a function not only
of what it does but what the individuals
in the other population are doing when
they interact with that individual
that's co-evolution okay let's talk
about the technical details of what we
saw uh just now uh as Nature's mentioned
this was work well ahead of its time uh
I mentioned that physics engines weren't
invented until 2000 1994 here this is
clearly a physics engine and a pretty
sophisticated one at that this was the
work of Carl Sims a computer Graphics
researcher um Carl was hired by uh was
hired by a company called thinking
machines back in the late 80s and early
90s just a little bit of computer
history for you here this was an attempt
to create the first parallel
supercomputers we'll see the connection
machine uh in a moment this particular
computer was designed to have multiple
processors inside and those processors
could talk to one another
sounds familiar it wasn't just the
software here that was ahead of its time
also the hardware on which this
evolutionary robotics experiment was
conducted thinking machines Corporation
as they were developing this computer in
the late 80s early 90s were thinking to
themselves well it's an awesome computer
it's got huge compute but what would
anyone ever do with it why would you
need to have a whole bunch of things
being computed in parallel
the CEO of this company saw some of Carl
sims's early computer Graphics work and
some of these virtual agents and
realized if you want to try and evolve
populations of these things like
populations of organisms evolve in
nature wouldn't it be great if each node
in this machine were dedicated to
simulating one of these creatures and if
so we could simulate a whole population
of these creatures
simultaneously so you can see early on
here in the early 1990s a lot of the
basic assumptions of how we now go about
evolving robots in silico and then
transferring them to reality we laid
down in this initial
experiment
okay all right so uh the connection
machine here uh the particular machine
that was used was the connection machine
five which had uh 1024 cores and it had
a peak speed of 131 gig flops per second
back in the early 90s this is a Mac Pro
from a few years ago now when I made
this slide 91 gigaflops per second so
this big machine here had about the same
compute as most of your laptops at the
moment not bad actually for the early
1990s all of the experiments that you
just saw that Carl ran on the cm5 Carl
used a population size of 300 so had
about 300 uh robots being evolved in
parallel and evolved it for about 100
generations and that took about three
hours on the cm5 at that time so not
that different probably from what you're
doing right now just on a much much
bigger hunk of metal uh if you go back
and watch Jurassic Park one of the nice
things about the cm5 is it had these
nice flashing red lights on it and you
can see that actually in the control
room room of Jurassic Park in the first
movie What are the red lights
representing do you
think aside from just a nice Bell and
whistle to help sell CM FS they actually
had a functional
purpose what do you think it meant when
all the red lights were off or all the
red lights were on is it Ram maybe how
many red lights do you think there
are too many to
count a thousand 24 why did you think
that absolutely right so at a glance you
could tell how efficiently the machine
was being used so it was actually set up
for Diagnostic purposes uh and some
Hollywood exec passed through the
connection machines offices and said
that's awesome we need that in our new
movie that we're making about
dinosaurs okay all right so that's the
hardware let's talk about the software
now we're going to talk about the
genotypes and the phenotypes in Sims
experiment here just as a reminder
genotypes is the blueprint right all of
the encoded information about in our
case in all the experiments we've seen
in this course that genotype contains
some information about the robot in your
assignments your genotype probably is
still a string of floating Point values
which specifies the weights of the
synapses inside the controller which is
inside your robot there are many many
parameters of your robot like for
example the masses of the links that are
not encoded in the genotype the
phenotype is the thing that's built from
the genotype built from the blueprint
again in this course the phenotype for
us has usually been the geometry of the
robot how it moves and its controller so
phenotype is sort of this umbrella term
for the thing produced by the
genotype the genotype again can specify
more or less of the
phenotype some aspects of the phenotype
is specified manually upfront by us and
we turn some of those phenotypic
parameters over to the genotype or
encode them in the genotype and let
Evolution figure out what those
parameters should be
yeah okay that's the genotype to
phenotype what we haven't talked about
too much in this class yet is the GTP
map I think I've mentioned this in
passing a few times now the genotype to
phenotype map is the algorithm or the
mapping or the process or the function
the verb the thing that transforms the
genotype into the phenotype in the case
of us biological organisms that mapping
is
fantastically complicated it's devel
usually referred to as development the
way your genotype influences you as a
single cell into the thing that's
sitting here in the room with us
today simulating that whole process in
silicone nobody's figured out how to do
it yet because it's fantastically
complicated question number one how do
we do it question number two should we
do it if we want to automatically uh
design autonomous and safe machines do
we need a fantastically complicated
genotype to phenotype map nobody knows
yet but in this experiment today we're
going to see the most complicated g2p
mapping we've seen so far in this course
and you just saw it produces some pretty
sophisticated results not bad okay so
let's start with the genotype uh
remember that this is encoding some
information different genotypes we've
seen in this course encode genetic
information in different data structures
we've seen strings of floats we've seen
trees whenever we talked about genetic
programming genetic programming is that
particular class of evolutionary
algorithms that tends to encode
genotypes in trees today we're going to
look at genotypes that are encoded as
graphs a graph is made up of a series of
nodes the circles that you see over here
and edges that connect nodes together
that's a graph the genotypes in The Sims
work are particular types of graphs
nested directed multi-graphs so we'll
unpack each of these three uh adjectives
as we go but for now we're going to
think of these genotypes as graphs and
the phenotypes again hopefully look
pretty familiar to you strictly speaking
they're trees there is some root node
root link if we were to do this in
pyrosim uh and a series of links that
are connected to parent links with
rotational joints nothing uh nothing out
of the ordinary
here this particular mapping the way
that we're going to turn these graphs
into trees is a recursive algorithm we
haven't gone into the details of exactly
how this mapping happens yet but you
should be already able to see some
there's some visual hints here about the
recursive nature of this mapping how is
it
recursive what does it mean to have a
recursive genotype to phenotype
map phenotype influences the genotype uh
that the phenotype influences the
genotype that could be the case it's not
the case here a good
guess the graph has self connection the
graph has self connections we're going
to walk through this GDP map in a moment
and as we do we're going to walk through
this graph we're going to read out this
blueprint in a recursive manner some of
these links are going to bring us back
to places we've been before and as we
walk along this graph this graph because
it's a blueprint is going to tell us how
to build stuff and as we build stuff
we're going to get things that have self
similar structure
what do I mean by selfsimilar
structure the recursiveness of this GP
mapping is going to tend to produce
phenotypes that have certain features
they tend to look self
similar what does that
mean look the
same at different scales they look the
same at different scales right so if we
look at just this part of this phenotype
we get this little y structure and then
if we zoom in a little bit more we see
that same y structure again zoom in
again we see that little uh we see that
y structure again and so on this is
self- similarity or depending on the
phenotype it can be a fractal structure
you zoom into human physiology or the
physiology of most every organism it is
also self
similar if you were to look at your own
vasculature system at the at the whole
body level it looks like a tree a whole
bunch of big trunks pumping blood into
smaller branches if you zoom in on any
part of your vasculature system you see
smaller and smaller branching all the
way down to the molecular level
self-similarity tends to be ubiquitous
it's everywhere in uh organism
phenotypes
let's just connect this back for a
moment to our discussion about hypernet
and cppns compositional pattern
producing networks you remember that
evolutionary algorithm would paint
patterns into an AR a space of arbitrary
Dimension that GP map the GDP mappings
that was built into cppn that mapping
was designed to also produce self-
similar structure or bias Evolution
towards symmetry repetition
and so on so the art of creating a good
GP map is that a random genotype a
random blueprint doesn't necessarily
produce a random collection of Parts it
tends to produce phenotypes that have
particular features and typically these
maps are designed to produce typical
features that we also see in nature like
for example symmetry in our species the
left side of our bodies tend to looks
like the right side of our body if you
look inside us you tend to see self-
similar structures and so on
constructing a good gep top map is a
very difficult thing to do it's still a
bit of a a uh black magic a black art
Dark Art it's not so obvious to see how
to do it this particular one is
complicated and seems to work well one
of the reasons why seems to be is that
when you
populations of these things populations
of these genotypes they tend to produce
self similar
structure remember the video that you
just saw you actually saw perhaps
without realizing it a lot of examples
of phenotypes that had self-similar
structure in
it like what what did you see in the
video that looked in retrospect self-
similar crab the crab how so was
symmetrical two
arms absolutely it was symmetrical not
necessarily self-similar self-similarity
is not necessarily the same thing as
symmetry you can have something that's
symmetric but not self-similar you can
have something that's self-similar but
not symmetric but yes one of the things
that this GTP mapping gives you in
addition to self- similarity is uh is
symmetry actually you can see it here
all three of these phenotypes are
bilaterally symmetric
there was that kind of worm you can go
back and look at the video and every
segment of that worm was a little bit
smaller than the segment in front of it
if you kept zooming in on pairs of those
segments that made up that worm you'd
see this you'd see the similar pattern
at every scale a big one followed by a
slightly smaller
one okay all right so let's have a look
at how this uh let's have a look at how
this works let's dive in now and look at
some more detail of the genotype as I
just mentioned the genotype is encoded
as a graph a graph is a series of nodes
and those nodes are connected with
edges in these particular genotypes in
these particular graphs they are labeled
every node and every Edge has a bunch of
numbers associated with it that's the
blueprint that that's the
information okay let's have a look at
some of the labels some of the numbers
that are attached to each and every node
in the graph there are three numbers
attached that describe the body part
Dimensions they describe the length and
width and height of the block that
should be built whenever we visit that
node you'll notice that these nodes have
little names associated with them
this is meant to be a reminder to the re
reader that each
node describes how to build a single
link if we want to build a single link
we need to know what the length and
width and height of that rectangular
link is we'll come back to the Joint in
a moment we'll come back to some of
these nodes we're going to have to jump
around a little bit in the description
of this genotype okay so let's start to
actually execute this G top map let's
imagine that this little node or this
little graph is sitting inside a
population of graphs we have a
population of these genotypes we need to
take each genotype and turn it into a
robot we need to turn it into a
phenotype how do we do that we start by
visiting the root node in the graph
there's one one particular node which is
sort of
arbitrarily dict uh denoted as the root
node we go there first and inside that
node we find three numbers length width
and height we build a link of exactly
that
specification and now we we leave this
node and we travel along bo uh all
outgoing
edges here we
go okay we would typically do this in
parallel but for the sake of this
morning let's do this uh one one after
the other so we just built this
particular link here using the
information that's inside this node we
travel out along this link or this Edge
and edges also have a bunch of numbers
associated with them there's a bunch of
labels attached to each and every Edge
in the
graph those labels tend to be
Deltas we just left this node and we
just created we just created a node of a
particular length width and
height so when we leave when we leave
that node we're going to take all of
that information with us we're going to
carry that information in memory and
these numbers are going to tell us how
to alter those numbers there are three
numbers associated with an edge that
tell us how to change the scale they
change us they tell us how to change the
length width and height into some new
length width and height which we'll call
L Prime W Prime and H Prime so far so
good okay uh we talked about 3D
orientation a few minutes ago we're also
going to take with us roll pitch and yah
which perhaps at the beginning is just 0
0 0 there's another three numbers
associated with this Edge a fourth fifth
and sixth number that tell us how to
change the orientation of that object so
we get a new rooll a new pitch and a new
yaw so far so good there is a seventh
eth and Ninth number that tell us how to
change the 3D position of the center of
the link that we just
built so far so good okay let's pull
back a little bit and think about the
intuition of this we visit the root node
we build a link we travel along edges
and as we do these nine numbers are
changing when we finish traversing The
Edge we arrive back at some other node
or possibly the same node When we arrive
at that node we have a length width and
height we have an a roll pitch in ya and
we have a new XY
and
Z drop a link we create a new link so
every time we visit a node we create a
new link everybody see that so far so
good okay obviously we need some joints
as
well when we are sitting at a node
you'll notice that there's a bunch of
joint parameters as well but this is a
little confusing a node is telling us
how to build a link the node is also
telling us how to build a
joint but a joint requires two links
right how do we interpret this
information that this node in the
genotype in the blueprint is telling us
how to build a joint but a joint that
connects what to
what do you
think let's go back to the beginning of
this GDP map we started here at this
node and we just
built a single
link there's information that's telling
us how to build a joint how do we build
a joint we don't even have two links yet
we only have
one Ah that's it so this very first link
that we build we ignore the joint
information but as Emily said when we
leave a node we know what we just built
we just built this one we travel along
the edge and as we travel along the edge
we come back to this node or another
node and we build
another we build another link so we just
built a link We remembered which one we
just built and now we're sitting at this
note again now we take this information
which tells us how to connect the link
we just made with the link we just made
previously everybody see that okay so we
just built the trunk we went along this
left Edge and we built this left
Branch pause we just built this trunk we
simultaneously at the same time we went
along the left link we also went along
the right
link this link also has information
about how to change size orientation and
position and those nine numbers over
here when we come back here tell us how
to build a
different link the right
Branch so we've visited this node three
times and we've traveled along two edges
so
far so far that's given us a phenotype
that's made up of 1 2 3 links and one
two
joints everybody see how this is going
okay so a lot of information to throw at
you I'll just pause for a moment
questions anything that's
confusing question yeah maybe we haven't
gotten into to yet but in the edge
labels have we spoken as what reflection
is is that we haven't we'll get there
there's some additional labels that we
haven't talked about yet we'll get there
in a minute Nate
what it means to Traverse all of the
edges from a single node like in these
cases they're all symmetrical so it
makes me wonder like is what you do on
the left automatically on the right
absolutely not it just in this
simplified example yes but the Deltas
over here the the instructions about how
to change uh size orientation and
position those nine numbers don't have
to be the neg these nine numbers over
here don't need to be the negatives of
these numbers over here they could be
nine completely different numbers which
would produce a very it would produce a
nonsymmetric
tree but that tree would still be self
similar because this thing is still
recursive everybody see
that okay good observation any other
questions or observations before we push
on yes uh all uh creation happens before
even simula absolutely right so good
point so the genotype to phenotype
mapping is just telling us how to
construct the thing the robot in the
simulation we haven't even simulate we
haven't even sent this thing to the
physics engine yet we just talked about
creating urdf files the physics engine
needs to it the the physics engine needs
a blueprint it needs information about
what to build it's a little confusing
this blueprint is building this thing
which in turn becomes a blueprint that's
interpreted by the physics engine right
we're going to take this thing in a
moment we haven't got there yet and put
it or Sims is going to put it in his own
physics engine ah I forgot to that
reminds me of a detail I forgot to
mention Sims wrote this physics engine
himself from
scratch you'll notice that there's some
Ray tracing
Shadows are these necessary for
simulator an incredibly talented person
these are one of these human beings that
was sort of ahead of their time a lot of
a lot of details in here that we don't
necessarily need this was the first
physics engine ever made built by
hand I don't know about you but I would
love to see the code of this physics
engine good luck I've asked Carl a few
times he's pretty tight liit about it if
anyone manages to convince Carl to uh
show us the code I would love to hear
from you
okay sorry bit of a discursion there
other questions comments before we push
on okay let's talk uh let's talk a
little bit about the rest of these
labels the rest of them are kind of
optional they're kind of bells and
whistles the most important ones are
what do we build how do we create the
joint and how do we alter what we build
as we travel along these edges as long
as you get that part you're good okay
all right let's talk about these
additional labels which again are
sitting on each and every node we know
which two links to attach together
that's built into this GTP map but how
exactly do we build that joint there's
an additional uh integer here which
tells us which kind of joint to build we
could connect this link to this link
with a hinge if the genotype tells us to
do that rotational joints that you are
all now very familiar with the genotype
might instead tell us to connect those
two links together with a ball in socket
joint some of you have tried to simulate
or approximate this now in your final
project what do you think joint limits
means different physics engines have
slightly different words for things
you're all experts on physics engines
now what does joint limits mean do you
think it's the C like offset from near
position absolutely right so for
building a hinge joint does it have wide
limits or narrow limits
the genotype is again dictating some
features now of the joint
itself okay let's talk about this one
recursive limit this one is kind of
interesting there is a number uh there's
an integer sitting inside every node
it's an integer that's interpreted as
the recursive limit let's go back and
have a look at this genotype when we
first start interpreting this genotype
we visit this node it tells us to build
this trunk we go out along both outgoing
edges simultaneously which means we come
back to this node a second then a third
time which causes us to build this and
this
node for each of those second and third
visits we go back out another two times
and another two times which causes us to
build this then this then this then this
this is the recursive part right if we
kept going we would build a tree of
infinite depth we'd have a tree made up
of infinite lengths which of course
would kill your physics engine so like
any recursive algorithm which is exactly
what we're looking at this GTP map is a
recursive algorithm we need to give it
some way to know how to stop every time
we visit this node whatever this
recursive limit integer is when we leave
that node we decrease that integer in
the node by
one if we ever arrive back at this node
and RL equals z we stop the traversal of
the
graph okay we've got this genotype which
is a graph we've got a whole bunch of
numbers labeling each node and we got a
whole bunch of no numbers labeling each
Edge we haven't talked about simulation
yet we haven't talked about the brain of
this robot yet and we haven't talked
about the evolution of these robots yet
once Evolution starts running once we
start evolving populations of these
genotypes what do you think happens to
these numbers inside these
graphs what is evolution going to do to
these
genotypes tweak them tweak them them
being
what all the different parameters a
mutation can hit any label on any Edge
or any
node in addition there are two
additional mutational operators there
are two additional ways that the
evolutionary algorithm can mutate these
genotypes mutations can fiddle with all
of these numbers and it can also and it
can also what do you think those two
additional mutation operators
are abs absolutely not add a body part a
body part is part of the phenotype
mutations don't act on phenotypes they
act on genotypes a mutation can add or
remove an edge or add or remove a node
which often has the result of adding
removing Andor modifying one or more
body parts that's the phenotypic impact
of a mutation to the
genotype yeah what happens if a mutation
let's take this genotype right here
imagine this genotype survives and
produces an identical copy of itself a
child graph and o one and only one
mutation event occurs which is a
mutation hits the recursive limit inside
this single node and it increases the
value of this recursive limit Let's test
our intuition or let's test our
understanding of this GDP map what's
between the child phenotype and this
parent phenotype you're going to get
another branches add
to branch of absolutely in the child the
recursive limit is higher which means
when we translate the child's genotype
into its phenotype we're going to
Traverse through this uh graph
recursively one more time or One More
Level which is going to to sprinkle as
you mentioned a series of uh pairs of
Twigs on the end of this tree we're
going to get a slightly more arborized
child compared to the parent if the
mutation instead had randomly decrease
this recursive limit the child would
have less branches than the parent yeah
one way of building up your
understanding of how this this
particular GDP Map works or any GDP map
is to try and visualize what happens if
the genotype changes what kinds of
effects of phenotype Could
Happen okay let's play this game one
more time let's take this parent
genotype it produces an identical child
uh graph and now there's a mutation to
uh the change in scale on one of the
edges let's imagine a mutation hits this
Edge and it hits one of these three
numbers it Alters the delta in
scale how does the child look different
from the parent this one's a little
trickier what's going to be different so
it depends on what direction it changes
okay but it's children branches on it's
just on one Edge this Edge it's the
mutation hit this Edge right so let's
say the Delta it it makes the delta is
going to make it that the branch is
proportionally larger okay you're going
to end up with one side of the tree
that's going to be heavier looking than
the other because each branch is
only different is different by a
different amount that makes you got all
of it right except one little piece
you're absolutely right let's assume
that the mutation increased the Delta of
the scale it's telling this new Branch
to be a little bit bigger relative to
the parent to to this link than it was
in the parent you mentioned the left
side of the tree it wouldn't be the left
side it would be each branch the left
one would be bigger among every pair of
branches among this pair the size of
this link relative to this link is going
to be different in the child than in the
parent and this branch is going to also
be different in size compared to this
one this one is left
unchanged so a mutation has changed one
number in the genot y but that has
affected more than one number or more
than one part of the phenotype this is a
complicated genotype to phenotype
mapping same goes for you if you have an
offspring and there's a mutation that
hits one nucleotide in your genetic
instructions there's just one change in
your set of genetic instructions
compared to your offspring that is
unlikely to affect just one and only one
part of your Offspring GP maps in nature
and here don't work that
way
question the way
theive would there be a way
to it's GNA sound weird would there be a
way to have a variable number of
recursive edges at each time the not is
visit so like could you have it that
there's
the option of either three branches or
two branches great question so imagine a
phenotype in which the left side of the
tree only has a depth of
three but on the right side of the tree
there's a depth of four for example
that's a particular phenotype what would
be a genotype that encodes that is there
a genotype that encodes that it's a
great it's actually a very good
question hard for this setup to do it
not impossible but it can be done we
could also make a change to the genotype
to phenotype mapping I've explained to
you how Carl came up with this GDP map
but we could make an alteration to this
GDP map to make what you just said
easier for evolution to do how how might
we do it would it be instead of having
it loop back have two more noes like
those back each other we could we could
start to build more nodes and more edges
to approximate this depth three depth
four tree it'll work but it's a little
bit inelegant we're adding a lot of
stuff to the genotype can we make a just
a slight change to how this whole thing
whole works that this would still
produce a depth three depth four
tree ones Bingo move this label this
integer from the nodes to the edges if
we have an RL label of three sitting
here actually no that's still not going
to work that means the left pair of
branches is always going to be shorter
than this one but I think you're on the
right the right track that's that's the
way we think about GTP Maps exactly
right we made a change to the overall
GDP map we moved this label from a node
to an edge and that alters the kinds of
phenotypes we tend to get with these
genotypes I think it might be fun to
have edes that have a probability of
being ah
okay absolutely right we could we could
make this a probabilistic recursive g2p
map all of these numbers represent
probabilities of things happening more
often or less often than others
great lots of ways we could do that what
would you tend to see in the phenotypes
do you think if you had some
probabilities Incorporated in the
genotype or would happen happen to the
phenotypes in general see more variation
in their designs absolutely right so in
this tree every single branch has
exactly the same depth right uniform if
it was probabilistic that would no
longer be true that might make it easier
for evolution to evolve robots that do
whatever we want them to do or maybe
harder for evolution to evolve robots to
do whatever we want them to do another
issue we haven't touched yet about GDP
Maps is do they make it easier on
Evolution or harder on Evolution to
produce whatever we want Evolution to
produce another open problem in the
field nobody knows you come up with yet
a different g2p map is it going to make
things easier or harder no one
knows other
questions okay let's keep
going somebody mentioned the reflection
uh uh the reflection label down here it
doesn't say it here this is a binary
label it's either zero or
one as we're going through here and
we're executing these Deltas the way
that we build things the reflection can
sort of flip things around as we
continue
building I think that Carl threw it in
although he didn't say explicitly in the
paper I think he threw it in to make it
more likely for phenotypes to have
symmetry hard to say it's not too
important for our purposes what about
this last one
terminal only flag it's called a flag so
for computer scientists that's a that's
a strong signal that this label is a
binary
number what does it do what does it do
and why did Carl throw it in do you
think it's a label that's sitting on
edges every Edge has one of these to
Flags that's either zero or one sitting
on that
edge I can
think the not joint it lets it lets not
the node it's the the thing that's
constructing the phenotype our program
our program instruction coun or whatever
that's sitting on a particular node or
Edge it's telling it go along this Edge
or don't go along this outgoing Edge it'
be really useful to have like a a claw
tip at the end of your arm you could say
oh leg leg leg and when you run out put
a absolutely terminal only flag here so
if the terminal only flag is set to one
that's the edge saying stay away from me
do not travel along me build whatever
you need to build and when you're
sitting in a node and you're cons
considering traversing along me you're
only allowed to Traverse along me when
the
nodes uh when the nodes recursive limit
is zero once you've reached the
recursive limit of building something
now now you're allowed to follow the
edge and build whatever you arrive at on
the other side of the edge Carl probably
threw it in thinking that for some of
these creatures it would be good to have
a unique structure at the end of some of
these appendages a claw a head a foot a
hand who
knows okay all good okay all right let's
again test our understanding of this GDP
map I've left on the right hand side of
the slide for you all the
labels and uh all the node labels and
all the edge labels I want you to take a
minute you can do this yourself or turn
to a neighbor and talk it over pick one
of these robots and think about can you
write down a genotype maybe just the
nodes and edges that's likely to produce
that
phenotype I'll give you two minutes to
think on that see if you can write down
some of the genotypes for some of these
P phenotypes and then we'll see what you
came up with
pen and paper might be useful
here some are easier than others
as
okay let's start with the 10,000 ft view
here which of these 12 phenotypes do you
think has the simplest
genotype simple meaning the fewest
number of nodes and
edges eight why
eight it's like the snake it's linear
back on you only need one Edge and
one possibly that you could get away
with one node one Edge for eight maybe
although I see a little bit of structure
in this robot that says maybe
not what's that 10 is the easiest 10 is
the easiest okay I here vote for 10
Emily
seven eight if you look if you squint
you can sort of see there's one two
three and then one two three and then
one two there's a little looks like
there's a couple of kinks in here hard
to say my vote is with seven
as well we have one node we imagine that
there's one node that tells us how to
make the
head and one outgoing Edge and I'm not
going to write down all the labels for
this one but one that says to change the
leg the decrease the length decrease the
height and decrease the width by a
little bit build something a little bit
smaller then a little smaller and a
little smaller and a little smaller I
would bet that you could probably
construct by hand a genotype and fill in
all the node the node labels and the
edge labels here that would produce
something that looks quite a bit like
this anyone tackle any other
robots what might be a genotype for
number
six how many nodes and
edges uh for six I thought you know I
like starting in the bottom center Cube
that would be one node and that loops on
itself like to make the three Center
ones and then it has I'll call this
segment yeah and then there's another
node that does little wings and from
each Center segment there's two edges
that could go to
that we'll make a node called Wing node
I think you're right this something like
this would probably build something that
looks like this
everybody with with me so far okay okay
so let's go back for a moment and talk
about the actual name for these
genotypes now we're ready to unpack this
term we now know why it's why why these
genotypes are graphs they're made up of
nodes and edges it's a directed graph
meaning that all of the edges have an
arrow associated with them they have a
direction we know when we're at a node
we know which of the edges are outgoing
edges and for that node we also know
which are the incoming edges so we've
got a directed graph on our hands if
you've ever taken a complex systems
course or a math course youve probably
come across directed graphs before
what's a
multi-graph you can have multiple edges
between the same pair of nodes we now
see why it kind of makes sense to have a
multigraph and makes sense when you're
going to create different versions of
things to Not Duplicate the genetic
information it's in there but the Deltas
alter how you build those things does
this mean that mod like you can just do
the
one absolutely this GTP map has been
around for a very long time many people
have used it used versions of it because
among other things it's modular a
mutation to any label of any no or any
Edge may impact just one part of the
body maybe just the head and leaves
everything else
alone or
alternatively a mutation to a node might
or to a label might affect many or all
parts Evolution can decide how modular
or or how non-modular to make these
genotypes we actually dedicated an
entire lecture to an evolutionary
algorithm that was designed to be able
to increase or decrease the modularity
of the phenotype same same thing here
but in a very different way yep good
observation okay we've unpacked two of
the adjectives here directed and
multi what about
nested have deliberately hidden this
last one from
you these genotypes as you're going to
see in a moment are also nested what do
you think that means first of all just
in general they make different graphs
inside each other inside every node of
these graphs there is another graph
inside this node is a series of nodes
and edges which we haven't seen yet what
do you think those embedded or nested
nodes in edges do they're in the
genotype what haven't we discussed
yet absolutely
okay here's a genotype on the left which
looks more or less like exactly this and
you'll notice this is a nested graph
there are nodes and edges inside
individual
nodes each each nested node so we're
going to talk about nested nodes and
then just
nodes each nested node dictates how to
construct part of the neural controller
for this robot all we've seen so far is
how the genotype genetically encodes the
body now we're seeing how the genotype
also encodes the brain along with the
body if you thought this GDP map wasn't
complicated enough here we go okay so
each nested node dictates some part of
the body and each nested
Edge these uh these thin arrows in this
picture denote how to build some other
part of the body we've got nested nodes
and nested edges how do you think these
two things
collectively uh dictate how to construct
the neural controller of the robot
strong hint nested nodes nested edges
telling you how to build the
brain which does
which we've drawn and seen many neural
network controllers in this class and
they tend to be drawn
as as graphs as nodes and edges each
nested node has information inside it
also has labels that tell the GDP map
how to build a
neuron and every Edge nested Edge tells
the GDP map how to build a
synapse okay you'll notice things like
uh wave absolute Sawtooth
wave we're we're visualizing here some
of the labels of the nested nodes these
names are meant to be strong hints again
about which feature of neurons these
nested nodes are
encoding
sorry not Behavior we're just talking
about neurons yeah wave absolutely a
waveform but not about the behavior
activation function the activation
functions each nested node here has many
labels associated with it and their
details we're not going to get into one
of those features is what is the
activation function inside the neuron
that's
constructed so far so good okay nested
edges that specify how to build a
synapse these nested edges have one and
only one label attached to them what is
it do you
think a nested Edge tells the GDP map
how to construct a synapse inside the
robot and there's one number associated
with that nested Edge what is that
numbered
encoding syn weight the synaptic weight
in this class the only feature we've
talked about for synapses is their
weights yeah that's
it I don't remember uh oh it's so s uh
Sim came up with a very large number of
activation functions oh ITP is
interpolate not a very common activation
function what's he doing here he threw
in every activation function he could
possibly think of and just sort of is
telling Evolution here you go if any of
these are useful when constructing the
brains of these robots knock yourself
out okay we've got two minutes left so
let's get over the last intellectual
hump of understanding this GTP
map uh sorry two more I want to talk
about so we see um there are some of the
labels inside these nodes are j0 and J1
these are this is a little confusing
these are joint sensor
neurons some of these embedded uh some
of these embedded nodes are telling the
GDP map how to build hidden nodes hid
sorry hidden
neurons some of these nodes like these
two are telling the GDP map how to build
sensor neurons these are sensor neurons
that as the name implies are attached to
the joints and these joint sensor
neurons uh detect and Report out the
angle of the joint these are
proprioceptive sensors we've seen these
called angle sensors we've seen these
called propri acceptive sensors for Sims
these were called Joint
sensors there are also two motor neurons
here these motor neurons are sending out
motor commands to the two
ectors again another synonym for
Motors in
robotics this node down here this is the
wing node this node is visited four
times 1 2 3 four
times when we're traversing this
genotype which means we visit this node
four
times what can you tell me about the
neural tissue or the bits of neural
network controller in these four wings
if we were to crack open any one of
these Wings what would we find
inside do you think
would we find no neural material some
neural material what would it look like
what would we see
inside like the right half of that diam
have inps for the joint position outputs
for the motor position and those would
be duplicated for each of the Wings
they'd be duplicated inside each of
these four wings you'd find this four
neuron neural
circuit this is a peripheral nervous
system bits of the brain that are in
different parts of the body we have
neurons and synapses in our arms and
legs and in our spine that's your taken
all together that's your peripheral
nervous system and then we got a whole
bunch of neurons and synapses
centralized in one part of our body
that's the central nervous system we'll
end here today these robots can also
have pns and CNS which we'll talk about
next time you have a quiz due tonight
you're working on your final project see
you Thursday